to become thin at a point. hepisiprou.

she ate quickly, bringing her hands to her mouth, it is known that the picures eat quickly. wapu a ha the waruwarumoma, thomi pe iyai ma re ropewei.

to eat very quickly, placing food in the palm of the hand. waruwarumoma.

the cotton hammocks get impregnated with the strong smell of the brew that the hekura use to kill. watota ke u nakini yii ke ki ni watota re ke ki rukerayoma (cha.

to impregnate with a strong smell, to give off a strong smell. rukerayoma.

without losing an instant Toucan leaned his arrows. mayepirithawe shereka ke ki rakitaa ha yaimakini (mit.

his arrows. yaimakini.

immerse yourselves in the river immediately. pe ta ithoa shoaparu.

to immerse oneself in water. ithooprou.

cultivated plant, variety of ocumo; Xanthosoma sagittifolium (Araceae). makami.

to raise and lower arms rhythmically for a while. imiki yokoyokomu.

to look at in a state. reiaprarou.

to perforate (synonym). tiwehe.

to pile tobacco leaves on top of each other and make balls to keep them dry. pee nahe ithori.

to finish doing something. poteteprou.

to be straight, correct, right. ihita.

they climbed (the mountain) and Kasimi felt vertigo. pe ha yãmothoni kasimi a shi kirihotayoma.

to climb (a mountain). yãmothoni.

to be locally narrow (hole, opening). teteã.

he buried a piece of arrow at the moment they arrived at the summit of the Gallineta mountain. shereka a si pokema, horãma the hehu ha pe kãi pororoaihe ke tehe (mit.

to arrive at the summit. pororoaihe.

to go to the bottom of, to get into the bottom of. hushomiprou.

he sent the one who was alert to live on a rock. a puhi re moyawei iha, pe shimai piyekou ha kuparuni.

to send someone somewhere; to return someone (to their home). moyawei.

a little light. rehehe.

cotton fiber, cotton. uko.

the fish are cooking (in water). yuri pe harii.

to cook in water, to boil in water. hari.

I didn't watch where the arrow went. shereka ya no taanomi.

to observe, to watch, to follow with the gaze. taanomi.

(speech of the south of the Orinoco River). shonipi.

plant. krããma.

he removed several banana shoots from different mother plants to take them. kuratha e si tikarea re shoaarareiwei.

to remove several banana shoots by digging the ground with the tip of a machete. tikareakei.

to not feel very well. tharehai.

to become thin, to thin out. hepisiai.

to amplify (noise, voice). nakepramai.

to make someone/something go down abruptly from a hammock. wahehepramai.

the night surprised them, and the noises of the darkness were heard. yetu ke the pe he itututou ha yaironi, titiri pe heã kuprou shoarayoma.

to be surprised by night. itututou.

Mujer-hormiguero se puso a dar vueltas en torno a la plaza central y a arrancar la corteza de los arbustos de la menstruación. teperiyoma a tiwaroa shoarayoma, yipi re hiki wakokoa ha shoarini.

to tear off a piece by pulling in one direction with the teeth and in the other with the fingers; an object from which a piece has been torn off in this way. wakokoa.

whirlpool, vortex. motohewe.

to whom shall I give it. weti ke iha ya hipeape.

to whom, to whose house. hipeape.

to indispose visitors by looking at them eat. maikaprai: indisponer a visitantes mirándolos comer.

indispose visitors. maikaprai.

to strike each other with the paw during a fight (a bird). kakekayou.

to turn over, to tip over easily. hotetai.

he grabbed a liana (with which) he pulled the tree towards himself (pulling to make the trunk lean). thoo thotho ha yãkãreni, the itutua ahetea totihikema.

the jaguar attacked the hekura, grabbed one of them brusquely and tore it in two. irani hekura ke pe nape keo ha kuparuni, hekura ai a wai re yãkãreiwei, a re kakaprareiwei (cha.

to grab brusquely, to catch in mid-air. yãkããi.

to be a little hard. fhihuhu-.

to be arched, curved upwards. kreethe.

sharpen the ear. opo-.

in the places where the caterpillars huddle together (on tree trunks), that's where Baba always went to cook his packages (of caterpillars) in the embers. kasha ke a wererope hami iwariwe kasha ã hãro ripraai yaimoma.

to form a compact mass (perfective aspect of the inchoative verb). arererayou.

reflect, my son (on what is happening). pusi a puhi ta piyekeri.

to start reflecting quickly. piyeketou.

the pasarela sank under the water when I passed over it (to cross the river). ihiraki a ha ya imii tehe the he paotariyoma.

to submerge, sink momentarily under water. paot.

to lift without effort, for an instant. herehetarei.

come to see for a moment. the ta mipraa.

Rabipelado was glancing (towards the scene unfolding). nãroriwe the re mitareiwei.

to go to see repeatedly; to look for a moment. mipraayo.

I rub the wapu fruits against the bottom of a basket. wapu ya ki hipii.

to rub toxic cooked fruits against the wall of a basket (s h o t e), after having soaked them for some time. hipii.

he carried (on his back) two children with shaved heads. e naha ihiru ke kipi he mãrokoshi kuwe, ke kipi re tikemapoheriiwei.

to carry on one. tikemapoheriiwei.

"wa, wa, wa. "wa, wa, wa. ", the váquiros walked in a line one behind the other. ", ware ke ki kuu kãi tutuatayoma (mit.

we walked in a line and heard the women crying. yamaki re tutuaiwei, suwe re pe miã kuoma.

to walk in a line one behind the other. tutuama.

ritual of isolation and purification performed by women having their first period (and their husbands); ritual state of those who have committed or participated in a homicide. unokai mou.

ritual state of a woman having her first period, and of a homicide (or someone who has participated in a homicide). unokai.

to tell someone to begin softening an object or to soften it locally. fepehea.

they immediately threw out fragments of the sipara rock (hitting it). sipara keki ãshãkãri yutuhamai shoapariyoma (mit.

to throw out, expel, eject, make jump far away. yutuhamai.

reserved. reservan.

don't lie, father, or you will die. fape a wãri nasimotihe, wa nomari.

to die, to kill. nomari.

(she) kills the konakona ants with embers, striking firebrands against each other (in this example the pronoun wahe you two refers to a single person: it is a mother-in-law addressing her son-in-law). konakona wahe pe ha yashishiaparini.

to scatter embers by striking firebrands against each other (to drive away and kill ants). yashishai.

to be planted vertically in the ground (an elongated object). estar plantado verticalmente en el suelo (un objeto alargado).

planted. plantado.

the nest of wasps whose opening is curved, whose opening is twisted (the nest in question is up high). pe kopina moroshi re payokoi, e moroshi wai ha toyeketaparuni.

curved, twisted. tapariyo.

to split in two. pahathoprai.

butterfly (diurnal). uwãuwã.

magnificent, Dormilona swayed in the middle of the group. wathaperariwe re a noshi harirawe krei kupariyoma.

to soften, to become soft. krããhãã.

to cut in two. pakaroprai.

to be very hungry. potipotimi.

—Brother-in-law, is that really you. —shoriwe, kahe wa thawe. —Yes, it's really me. —awei ke, kamiye ke.

to clean, to tidy up, to paint or color white; to let something whiten. aumai.

we followed the watercourse downstream and (scared away) paujíes that took flight. yamaki mi shiro ha werepokirini, paruri ke ki komi yeprariyoma.

to descend a watercourse walking downstream. werepokirini.

Jaguar was walking quickly swaying when the hekura shot arrows at him. ira ke a pata rahurahumou tehe, hekura peni a niyapraremahe.

to walk quickly swaying the torso and arms. rahumo.

to hang upside down (perfective form). ihohokei.

it is up there. isi hami the kua.

on top, at the summit. fisi hami.

ser conversador. wã kashu.

to be talkative. kashu.

to go around in circles, to describe circles. katitihu.

to break by falling, to crack as a result of a shock (a round object). yahathoprou.

to gather one. kohep.

when you put your hand as a visor, can you see the distant Yanomami houses. wa huko si ha yohooni, yãnoãmi wa the pe yahipi prahawe taprai.

to put the hand as a visor to look into the distance (a habitual gesture of shamans). kekamai.

there the exit is closed. kiha yoka weeatayoa.

closed, obstructed (with logs, branches, etc.). weeo.

the great guatura has a muddy appearance. wii ke a pata mimou koshi.

to seem brave. fmimou puhi tikrohowe.

to seem, to appear. fmimou.

I dropped the machete. sipara ya huherema.

I let it fall. ya the huherema.

to drop, to let fall an object held in the hand. huhei.

snakes are toad eaters (of the yoyo species). oru yoyo warewe ke a.

honey seeker, you who pretend to be a shaman, listen then. oi porewe, horehore hekuramorewe a wãri yimika ta taiku.

the one who performs (the action indicated by the verbal root). warewe.

you will bathe immediately after getting water. mãu wa u hikeai tehe wa yarimou shoaope.

to do immediately, to do at the same time, to ventilate. yarimou.

to attack the enemies. shi karukai.

to attack enemies. karuku.

extend (a flexible thing), stretch a liana between two banks to cross a stream. frihiãmai.

It has a white line. Pei waiparapi uu.

white line. waiparapi.

to be folded or have been folded once, to be partially rolled up. wapurea.

shapomi na: zool. shapomi na: zool. , bee (unidentified (animal, plant)). , abeja (no identificado (animal, planta). It builds its nest in leafy trees; its honey, called shapomi, is sweet. ).

bee. abeja.

he knew immediately that he knew tobacco. "pee nahe tai yaia yaro", e puhi ha katitipraikuni.

to determine immediately what it is about, to find a solution quickly, to guess immediately what it is about. katitiprao.

tomorrow we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. henaha pemaki re yohooparekiriowei, pema yo nohi thaprai shoaope.

we will descend from the mountain and ambush at the edge of the path. yohooparekiriowei.

those in the surrounding position [he ithorokokei, perf. mau u wai heikio re taiw e h e i: "ei re the wai kua waikia kupe": aquellos posición de cerco [he ithorokokei, perf. ; he ithoque (knowing the region)] knew that that stream of water was the last (they said): "this is the last (there is no other)". ; he ithoque (conociendo la región) sabían que esa corokoprao: quedarse un cierto momento en posirriente de agua era la última (dijeron): "ésta es ción de cerco.

knowing the region. ithoque.

they went fishing. yuri pe kããi mi huokema.

to go somewhere with a specific purpose. huokema.

don't think you'll be able to express yourself better after drinking the spicy drink. yãimoro wa u ha koani.

child. koani.

to see in dreams people who are far away, or to see distant places. kuramai.

do not gather in large numbers. pe mi shuããtihe.

to gather in large numbers in the same place (people). shuãi.
